---
title: Notes 10/18/23
author: Lane Willis
type: page
nav_order: 1
created: 2023-10-24
parent: BCO5500
grand_parent: Classes

---

<details closed markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Table of contents
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }
1. TOC
{:toc}
</details>

---

## Marriage Counseling

### ***Differentiate Marriage Preparation, Enrichment, and Restoration Counseling
* Preparation: for seriously dating and engaged couples to help them vet the decision to marry and anticipate predictable challenges that do not emerge in the dating phase.
   * Foreshadowing. Looking forward. Is this a good idea?
   What preparation do we need to make for things that will be different?
- Enrichment: for married couples with relatively healthy marriages to improve and enhance the quality of their marriage.
    - Car metaphor: oil change, tires rotated, etc. Elongates the quality of its life.
    - Going from good to great or decent to good marriages.
    - Shared and mutually aware history.
- Restoration: For married couples in high distress contexts who need acute counsel for challenges that jeopardize the viability or safety of the marriage.
    - Car metaphor: new transmission, engine overhaul, etc.
    - Start with the assumption that we don’t know what we know. Gain an accurate history. Initial disclosure is not all of what happened.
        * One person is often at a significant deficit of information.
    - Adultery: False Love, True Betrayal

### Why do Churches Emphasize the First two?
- We have a very bad habit of offering enrichment level advice for restoration level problems.
- We address marriage primarily in public teaching forums.
- Therefore, we only want to say things about marriage that are universally true, not crisis-specific.
- Few pastors read about crisis marriage care issues.
    - What we read and study significantly impacts what we teach on and how we present it.
- We are leery to say things about marriage that could open the door towards divorce.

### What happens when we neglect level 3 (restoration)?
- Level 1 and level 2 marriage counseling are the equivalent of describing how a healthy diet and exercise routine contribute to overall fitness. These things are true and helpful. They are not timely for someone having a heart attack. After the level 3 issue is resolved, these types of counsel will become highly relevant again. It does not dishonor or discredit level 1 and 2 care to recognize the limits of their timeliness.
- Timely counseling is needed as well. (Adultery, abuse, addiction).
- Trace your steps. We want to afford people the courtesy of understanding so they know what is going on and how to proceed.

### Define When NOT to do Marriage Counseling (Winston Smith JBC Article)
- There are times in a marriage where working with them jointly would not benefit them or care for them well.
- There are situations in which marriage counseling is not the best approach and may actually do more harm than good.
    - Marriage counseling presumes that a couple’s problems are SHARED and that each spouse is partly responsible for what is happening.
    - But there are situations in which one spouse’s behavior is so destructive (addiction, abuse) that marital problems are best understood primarily as the result of that behavior, rather than the shared responsibility of both spouses.
    - Proactively destructive.
- There are other times when one spouse’s weaknesses, hidden issues, or lack of motivation may limit the effectiveness of marriage counseling. Here again, it may be wise to meet with spouses separately for a season, both to address individual problems to lay the groundwork for working with the couple together.
    - Passively non-engaged.
    - You don’t want to end up on either side of this place.

### Situations for not doing Marriage Counseling
1. Don’t do marriage counseling when one or both spouses lack self-control during sessions.
    - Name the awkward. You will feel highly uncomfortable.
    - Storming out example. Lack of self-control with anger.
    - How much did what I just saw mirror what you guys do at home? Rate the intensity of what I just saw?
        - If these are taken too personally, individual work might be needed here.
2. Don’t do marriage counseling when there is verbal or physical abuse in the marriage.
    - Darby Strickland, It is Abuse?
    - If one spouse is willing to harm the other to get their way, then that relationship is no longer mutual.
    - “The types of behavior that you are displaying are abusive and manipulative. I will only hinder your marriage if we continue to treat this as mutual.”
3. Don’t do marriage counseling when an addiction or other life-dominating behavior of one spouse is dominating. (See PowerPoint for actual point).
4. Don’t do marriage counseling when you suspect there might be more to the story.
    - Least clear of Winston’s points.
    - Potentially, one person doesn’t feel they can speak openly.
        - When they talk, they are looking at their spouse more than you and monitoring the reaction of their spouse instead of having a conversation.
        - Do I have a timid person or an intimidated person?
        - Stage this. Degrees on thermometer. Don’t be forceful right away.
    - Don’t discount having an honest interaction with the spouse so the other spouse can see they are not crazy. This can be valuable to the spouse who is being controlled/manipulated/blamed.
5. Don’t do marriage counseling when one spouse is highly defensive.
    - Danger of taking sides dynamic comes into play.
    - “I get the sense that how I am approaching things is off putting to you. Can you help me understand this better?”
    - If you get awkward in the presence of defensiveness, things might deteriorate quickly.
    - If you are lost at what to say, try to find a thank you and try to find a question.
    - Don’t try to fix awkward, explore it.
6. Don’t do marriage counseling when it is clear that only one spouse is motivated to do the work.
    - Matthew 7:1–5 exercise. (Log and speck exercise).
    - Point back to each spouse and ask them to point to the parts they can genuinely own and the parts they question.
        - Helps to alleviate the defensive nature of the prior accusation conversation.
        - Give them categories to place their thoughts and accusations.
    - Take the log out of your eye before you take the speck out of somebody else’s.
    - That is all I see versus that is all I am willing to do. Different responses here.

### Give Example of Marriage Preparation Counseling - GCM
* What is GCM?
	- Creating a Gospel-Centered Marriage (GCM) is a five-part seminar series designed to facilitate pre-marital mentoring (counseling) (artificial pairing) and serve as a marital enrichment resource for a church’s small group ministry (discipleship) (small group relationships).
		- Content is no different. The Relationship surrounding this material is different.
	- GCM provides marriage preparation and marriage enrichment level content. If a couple is in significant marital distress, they would need marriage restoration level care, which is more than GCM provides. GCM could serve as a helpful resource in the aftercare phase of their marital recovery.
* 5 Topics of GCM
	1. Foundations (6 Lessons)
	2. Communication (6 Lessons)
	3. Finances (5 Lessons)
	4. Decision Making (5 Lessons)
	5. Intimacy (5 lessons)
* Engaged couple meets 6 times and study one topic per seminar with an initial meeting to get to know each other.
* How Does Mentoring work?
	- Meeting one: Between mentors and mentees is focused on getting to know one another. What makes marriage work? Get to know each other well.
	- Next five meetings: Follow same basic process.
		- Engaged couple completes the pre-seminar evaluation.
			- Between 25 and 30 questions. Based on how you score this, it highlights which lessons you need to go over.
		- The best-fit section of the next seminar is chosen.
		- Mentors and mentees study that section of the seminar to discuss at their next meeting.
		- Discussion questions are provided for each lesson.
	- The word that should capture this process is “TAILORED.”
	- Two meetings after getting married with no curriculum involved.
* Why Mentoring?
	- The advantage that GCM strives to catalyze has to do with the type of relational dynamics that differ between pastoral counseling and mentoring.
	- When a couple does their pre-marital work via formal pastoral counseling, what does it look like to reach out for help during the inevitable ups and downs of the first year of marriage. It entails calling the church to make an appointment with the pastors.
	- When is a newly married couple likely to do that? Probably not until things are “THAT BAD.” Mentoring changes this dynamic. With the GCM mentoring model, the big “win” is in this post-marital relational dynamic, even more than the pre-marital teaching content.
	- It isn’t about how well we educate them, but how well we stay connected with them for when things get hard.

### Give Example of Marriage Enrichment Counseling - EFMT
* Emotion Focused Marriage Therapy (This will be an amateur level discussion)
	- Husband and wife feel really far apart.
	- As the counselor, we want to build trust and understanding that enables mutual understanding so they grow closer to one another.
		- Drew this on the board for class.
	- The counselor is a combination of translator and speed bump.
	- The focus is on translating the emotions that fuel each spouses’ reaction (emotional intelligence approach).
		- Emotions do things. They move. They have intentionality. They are pursuing something.
		- Emotions aren’t value neutral. They reveal what you strive towards and what you desire.
		- What is moving this person and why?
	- The counselor strives (when appropriate, see Lecture 8A and 8B) to make rational what seems irrational.
	- The counselor wins trust from each spouse and, thereby, strives to restore trust between the spouses.
	- Decision-making in marriage aside:
		- Never seen where they are both bad decision makers individually but come together to make good decisions. Haha!
		- Often seen where they are both good decision makers individually but come together and struggle to make good decisions together (Often because style of making decisions are different).
	- EFMT doesn’t necessarily fix anything. It doesn’t tell them what to do. But it helps the counselor change the atmosphere of the room and identify the decision or issue they need to grapple with together.
        - You want to teach people how to fish and not just give them fish.
* Examples
	- Couple with different viewpoints on decision making.
		- Reference to becoming entrenched. We don’t want to become entrenched in the good because we make that ultimate.
	- BC Question: How much of this is “just James 4” stuff and how much could/should practices like EFMT be used to help couples navigate these common challenges?
	- Listening seminar
		- What I hear often says more about me than what it does about the person speaking.
		- I tend to hear first what I fear and value most. I tend to see first, what I fear most (Snake example).
		- Hearing is not neutral. Reverential fear of the Lord helps me to discern what I am listening to better.
	- Where has the good thing become too important? Where is the good thing becoming a God thing?
		○ Discussion on the guy who desires respect and is at a point where when he gets it, it is no longer satisfying. Yikes.

* What makes counseling effective? (Aside)
	- 40% is the resources someone has outside of counseling.
	- 30% is the level of trust between counselor and counselee.
	
* Cohabitation argument: bradhambrick.com/cohabitation

* I’m encouraged. There is a lot I can do that will bless marriages in whatever ministry setting I find myself. I don’t have to be an expert. Continue to seek learning about these things. We will talk about more severe cases next week.

---

[Back to BCO5500](/notes/bco5500)
