---
title: Notes 10/25/23
author: Lane Willis
type: page
nav_order: 1
created: 2023-10-24
parent: BCO5500
grand_parent: Classes

---

<details closed markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Table of contents
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }
1. TOC
{:toc}
</details>

---

## Notes - Adultery and Sexual Addiction
* See *False Love* and *True Betrayal* for more information.

### Conference and Critique aside to start class
* The longer you are in ministry, the more you go to conferences for the people not the content.

### ***Journey from Lust to Adultery
* Matthew 5:27 - 30 reference
   * Referencing lust to adultery here.
   * Plucking eye and cutting hand is hyperbole, but the connection between lust and adultery is not. There is a connection there.
Clarification: This progression is NOT meant to imply that this is the universal developmental cycle of sexual sin.
* There is adultery that did not begin with pornography. Pornography does not necessarily lead to adultery. The purpose of the progression is to provide the rationale for why Jesus would teach that to look at someone with lustful intent is a form of or seed for adultery. This should be a sobering reflection on my sin and the depravity that is here.
* This is not a male only problem.

#### ***Lust to Adultery
1. Objectifying a person: Reducing people to a certain set of appealing features and measuring people's value by how much they please you.
2. Public visual lust: Using the objectification above as a scoring system and savoring actual people.
   * Need to see people as whose image they are made in, whose they are, and what God has for them.
3. Private Narrative lust: Allowing the scoring system to develop into a story in which you interact with someone in your imagination.
   * You can watch the weather pornographically.
4. "Soft" Porn: Using print, television, or internet to provide more "choice" but non-nude objects of lust and imagination.
   * "How far is too far" is the colloquial here. Not what we should be thinking. Need to run away. Much more about motive than activity.
5. Full Porn: Pursuing nude images and videos on the internet or other media forms and having the imagination expanded by professional "story tellers." The frequency, duration, and perversion of this activity can vary.
   * Professionals here. Think about professional ball players. Not synonymous, but can be thought of at some point this way. They have "mastered" their craft.
6. Interaction with a real, anonymous person: The other participant in the story becomes a real person with a real voice and a free will. This can be 1 (900) numbers, provocative chat rooms, strip club, or "sexting".
   * Before this point, everything is static. When you get here, there is more real time interaction.
   * Still entertainment purposes here.
7. Emotional relationship with a known person without touch: no longer is the other real person unknown. Thye have a real name, face, and history. They know your real name, face, and history.
   * This is more than a casual dating relationship. Early stages here.
8. Emotional affair with touch, without sex: This is probably the rarest item on the list, although it is frequently said to exist. This is a relatoinship with a real person with kissing, caressing, fondling, and other non-intercourse affections.
   * Frequently where things come to the office.
   * "We don't know what we know." It's annoying. Rarely is the first news all the news. We don't need to fix something we haven't assessed.
   * We are at the discovery phase, not the disclosure phase.
      * Do I get more than I already knew when I ask a question? If yes, disclosure.
9. One Time Sexual Affair: Now the intercourse barrier has been crossed, but (as in the case of a prostitute or drunken business trip fling) the relational connection may be low.
10. Affair in connected relationship: In terms of marital threat, the sexual affair is now secondary to the deepening "love" between the spouse and adultery partner. Sex is no longer a mere expression of passion, but also devotion.
11. Affair as Pseudo-Spouse/Leaving: No longer is the faithful spouse making the decision regarding divorce. The unfaithful spouse is the active party seeking to dissolve the marriage in order to pursue their adultery partner.

* Rarely does someone jump from 1 to 11. There are incremental steps that occur and need to be assessed.
* Am I being honest? Have I been as honest with my pastor as I have been with a counselor? (Public sermons to private advice also a long way from each other).
* When you are carrying a secret, you are not able to have vulnerable closeness with each other. How much does what you don't know impact what you just said?
* Is there an addiction quality to an affair? Or is there something broken in the marriage?
    * Not a one-size fits all answer here. Probably a both and here. Don't really ever want to blame the marriage though for the affiar. This does not explain or excuse adultery.


### Lust and Lying
* Two sides of the same coin.
* There is no "protecting from the truth."
   * Numbers 32:23, Luke 8:17, Hebrews 4:13
* It isn't the adultery that kills the relationship, it is the LYING.
* Deceit tends to be the flip side of the coin to addiction or other secret sins.

#### 12 Types of Lying (No Asterisks)
1. Changing Facts: This is the heading under which all "active lying" falls. Here the story is true, but key pieces of the story are changed.
2. Omitting Facts: This is the heading under which all "passive lying" falls. Here the story is true, but there are "dark spots" in the story. Often people who "omit facts" get defensive when they are called liars. But omission of known, important facts is lying.
3. False "Facts": This is a step beyond changing facts. It involves making up an entire scenario and is a step away form a double life (lying type 5). Lying of this type is hard to pull off and requires more elaborate efforts to support the false facts.
4. False Emotion: Now you have to play the part. If your lies are true, they require certain emotions. If you are going to remain "free," then you must become an actor.
   * Getting into the scenario.
5. False "Story": False facts produce false emotions. Together they require a false story. Your lies are starting to create their own world in which they could be true. You are forced to try to live between these two worlds' reality won't bend and your lies can't break without you being found out.
6. Minimizing: Maybe you are "smart enough" not to take the false route. You talk about "just porn" or being "just friends." Or, you talk about sexual sin in coded language such as a "slip" or having a "bad day." Minimizing is one of the more popular methods of lying (to others and to yourself) about sexual sin.
   * Placing an unfair burden of interpretation here.
7. Blame-shifting: Maybe you accept the facts and admit how serious the problem is, but you lie by shifting the responsibility. It's true and it's bad, but it's not my fault.
8. "I Don't Know": It is legal to "plead the fifth" in a court room, but it is deceitful to do so in life. "I don't know" is also used to force the questioner to nag or badger so their action can become the focal point of the conversation.
9. Hidden Agenda: This is deception by set up. You do something nice so you feel less guilty (without having to repent or change) and (intentionally or not) your spouse feels guilty for addressing the sin in your life. Self-pity is another common form of deception by hidden agenda. The essence of self-pity is beating yourself up over your sin instead of embracing repentance and change.
   * Flowers example we talked about earlier. Penance without confession.
10. Verbalizing Suspicion: This is the mild form of deception by counterattack. When you confront me in my sin, I attack you for your sins (real or fabricated). If I can't prove my case, then I will try to change who is on trial.
11. Slandering: This is the bold form of deception by counterattack. The goal is to intimidate the questioner out of asking any more questions and to solidify the role of the slanderer as the only one who "really knows" the truth about things - strengthening all other lies told.
12. Exaggeration: This is deception by magnification. Unlike other forms of lying which seek to shrink or hide from the truth, exaggerating makes truth larger than it really is. Truth moves from being an enemy to being a weapon; when it should always be a friend.
   * "You are right, I am awful, I will leave." Woah. You take control of the conversation by inflating and embellishing. Putting words in other person's mouth. Not fair. Dishonest.

### How to End an Extra-Marital Relationship

#### The Non-Existent Option
* It's not complicated, it's hard.
1. You are going to hurt one or more people that you care about.
2. You are going to have to be more honest with more people than you want to be.
3. An "easy" answer is not going to present itself that makes this situation "just go away."
4. The rest of your life is going to radically change based upon what you do with what you are reading.
5. Not just your life, but generations of your family, will be affected based upon what you do. (Bloody knife comment - someone who is torn, not actively resistent)

#### Steps to Take
1. Cut Off All Contact
   A. Cut off all contact: Clearly request no future contact for any reason.
   B. Disclose all forms of contact: Any form of contact should be disclosed to your spouse (i.e. secret cell phone, secret email address, rendezvous times in schedule, etc)
   C. Willingly surrender all contact: Hand over every form of contact to your spouse like a suicidal person needs to hand over their gun.
   D. Open Communication: "Open" should mean that you do not meet in person and anything you say is emailed to your adultery partner with your spouse carbon-copied. *Document this request in case a restraining order is needed.*
      * Restraining order: either you feel threatened/unsafe or documented requests for no contact that YOU AREN'T VIOLATING!
   E. Spouse Overtly Present: One way we communicate who we love most is by who we talk to about another. When you talked about your spouse to your adultery partner that revealed your primary allegiance.
   * What if it is an at-work relationship?
      * As a counselor, we don't tell them what to do. But we give advice and guidance.
2. Avoid the "Closure Trap"
   * There is no such thing as closure after adultery. Closure is a word that gives the impression of a settled, happy ending. One of the two romantic relationships in your life WILL DIE an awkward painful death. More uncomfortable still, you are going to decide which relationship (marriage or adultery) dies. There will be no "closure" for the dying relationship.
3. Disclose all attempts at future contact.
   * This is never clean. Most often future contact will completely occur. This is where they are testing, "are you serious?"
      * Did you mean this? Or were you just caught? Are you sure?
   * This relationship should be treated like a poisonous snake.
   * This is really important for your spouse to be able to trust you.
   * Steroid use in baseball example. When we catch Bonds, Clemens, etc, we really know that baseball wants to change.
   * Taking secret communication attempt to faithful spouse helps build trust despite the pain.
   * Anticipate these predictable moments.

### ***Two Timetables of an affair (John Bettler)
* The person who is being unfaithful and the person who is being deceived.

#### "Grief" Cycle for Unfaithful Spouse
* Shock - "there is no way that person would be interested in me."
* Denial - "we don't mean anything by what we're doing. We're just being friends."
* Anger - A sense of self-condemnation for doing something he/she knew to be wrong.
* Bargaining - convincing him/herself it's not that bad. Making deals. We only are going this far.
* Depression - A sense of guilt and hopelessness.
* Acceptance - Sin became normal, sense of getting away with it.
    * Maybe I can get away with it... My spouse hasn't found out... This is often when they get caught.
    * Discussion on mortality rate of sky-divers goes up after 50 jumps. They get lazy/used to it. They forget to check. Acclimated.
       * This is how it is for unfaithful spouses. They become less vigilant.
       * This is also how it is for child predators. Yikes.
    * Often the shock for faithful spouse picks up here.
* Forgiveness - Buying the lie that sin was necessary or right based upon a growing commitment to the motivfe sin fulfilled in his/her life.

#### Grief Cycle for Betrayed Spouse
* Shock - "Could my spouse really be cheating on me?"
* Denial - "No, there has to be another explanation."
* Anger - As certain builds or discovery hits, the wrongness of your spouse's actions is met with the appropriate emotional response, anger.
* Bargaining - Usually this centers around all the possible explanations you create for the "why" question and the implications you develop for each potential answer.
* Depression - A form of depression is part of accepting a painful reality that you cannot change. These chapters aren't going away.
   * 18 months gets ripped out and 18 months gets put back in. The faithful spouse starts flipping through the pages to see if they understand their story. They start to question everything that happened.
   * Out of basic human decency, the faithful spouse deserves to know their story.
* Acceptance - Assimilating the reality of unfaithfulness into his/her story.
* Forgiveness - Whether you chose to restore the marriage, you will need to come to a place of forgiveness towards your spouse or this pain will wither your life from this point forward.
   * Hurt which is unforgiven becomes central to our life.
   * If we grieve, it doesn't mean that we are not sad anymore.
   * We need to be able to discuss hurt as hurt, not hurt as anger.

### 10 Step Progression of Restoring Trust
Initial Caveat: This begins where the relationship is at its most broken. Not all marriages that experience betrayal will start at step one. Two key questions: "where is the couple at now?" and "where do we want to get?" (Where are you and what is next?)
   * Trust is NOT an absolute virtue. Honesty is an absolute virtue.
   * Trust people with how much trust they have garnered. Jaded vs niavete.
1. Require third party mediation: at this level of trust-brokenness you do not feel safe (at least emotionally) to be with your spouse without someone else present. Trust is built as you hear your spouse be honest with someone else.
2. Listen and Require Validation: I don't trust you, I trust facts. Skeptical of everything they say.
3. Listen and require less validation: Number of things that need to be proven decreases.
4. Rely on spouse functionally: Whether separated or in the same house, you begin to "do life together again." Budgeting, caring for kids, scheduling. "Living as roommates here."
   * Often stalls out here.
5. Share facts: As you functionally "do life" with your spouse, there is the opportunity to begin to share more of you again. This is you knowing stuff about me. Schedule, more facts.
6. Share Beliefs: As you become comfortable sharing facts, this naturally leads to sharing what you think about those facts. Conversations become meaningful again. Likes, dislikes, agree, disagree, etc. Learn or relearn how to have different opinions.
7. Share Feelings: Difference between throwing feelings at and sharing feelings with. Most likely, feelings have been thrust at instead of shared with. You are willing to receive support from your spouse.
8. Rely on Spouse Emotionally: Now you find yourself able to relax when he/she is away. It is now the exception to the rule when suspicions arise within you about your spouse's motives.
9. Allow spouse to care for you: Allowing your spouse to express affection has lost a sense of "invasion" or being "unclean." When your spouse wants to serve you, you no longer think cynically or about penance.
10. Relax and feel safer with spouse than apart: this is trust restored. Your spouse's presence reduces stress in troubling circumstances. Even when he/she doesn't have the answer, their presence is its own form of relief and comfort.
   * No Ultimatums or timetables. There is intentionally NO PACING GUIDE for this trust progression. You cannot force this or make it happen. Time-pressure stifles the growth of trust. Ultimatums are even more ineffective than timetables. The goal in this progression is to simply see where you are going next, not make a timetable for this to occur.
   * Sleep math analogy here.
   * What life are you choosing, what life are you fleeing?

---

[Back to EVA5100](/classes/semester-6/eva5100/eva5100.html)