---
title: Notes 11/15/23
author: Lane Willis
type: page
nav_order: 3
created: 2023-11-15
parent: BCO5500
grand_parent: Classes

---

<details closed markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Table of contents
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }
1. TOC
{:toc}
</details>

---

## Burnout and Self-Care

### Common Ministry Landmines from the Life of Moses
* Mostly sermon-like style. An example of a biblical counseling informed sermon.
Watching the End of the Movie without watching the Movie Example
**Numbers 20:1-13**
If we just take Numbers 20 by itself, we can often feel like the movie example above.

#### A Walk Through Moses' Life
* Exodus 1:15-16, 2:1-2 - Moses' family took great risk to protect beloved and attractive son.
* Exodus 2:3-10 - God allows his mother to raise Moses in Pharaoh's house.
* Acts 7:22 - Moses mastered the Egyptian education system. He stood out.
* Exodus 2:11-22 - Moses kills a man, runs for his life, marries, has children, and herds sheep in the desert. (First time we see Moses' temper).
   * Dr. Hambrick talked about the kind of thing that could derail our ministry. Odds are we know it already. I know the kinds of thing my flesh is prone to do. This is true.
* Exodus 3:1-15 - God speaks to Moses at the burning bush. "I heard the cries of my people."
* Exodus 4: God gives Moses confirmation signs; Moses is fearful and offers excuses; Moses takes his wife and children to Egypt to follow God's plan. No longer eloquent example.
   * Discussion of staff. Hitting the rock and being careless with it. Example of vintage wood bat and hitting rocks with it.
* Exodus 5:1-9 - Moses is rejected by Pharaoh
* Exodus 6:1-13 - God encourages Moses; the people grumble
* Exodus 7-12 - the 10 plagues. Knocking down Egyptian deities.
* Exodus 13-14 - God delivers Israel from Egypt and parts the red sea, providing plunder, and destroying the Egyptian army
* Exodus 15:22-24 and 16:1-3 - the people grumble and God provides manna
* Exodus 17:1-7 - the people grumble and God provides water from a rock.
* Exodus 18:13-23 - Moses is administratively overwhelmed because he is trying to do everything and gets delegation advice from his father-in-law.
* Exodus 20 - Moses receives the 10 commandments.
* Exodus 25-31 - Moses receives instructions regarding the tabernacle.
* Exodus 32:25-35 - Moses has to rebuke Aaron for making the golden calf.
   * Loss of trust in his number 2.
* Numbers 12:1-9 - Aaron and Miriam get jealous of Moses' leadership
* Numbers 16 - Moses faces the rebellion of Korah (people being nasty.)

#### A Second Glance at Numbers 20
1. Moses grew comfortable, casual, and finally aggressive with the things you used to hold with humility, fear, and integrity.
2. Moses made the moment about himself. Anger has a propensity to be highly self-centered and has a gravity that attracts all "similar" negative memories.
3. Moses forgot he was there to lead a people for God. The people would not stand a chance in the idol-infested promise land if they interpreted this moment as a failure of Moses.
4. Moses' life was not a failure (Hebrews 11:23-28). Moses' life was about much more than his story, so his failure bore consequences larger than we might feel fair. How do we respond to our failures? - Need to turn to the Lord. May even need to step aside if disqualified.

### ***Self-Care is Not the Same as Being Selfish

#### 3 Metaphors
1. Oil Change
    * When you get an oil change and do basic maintenance, the vehicle last longer. To not do this, it saves you money in the short-term, but costs you more in the long term.
    * You may get more done in a week, but in 5 years you crash.
2. Airplane Instructions
   * Oxygen mask instructions. Put on your own mask first before placing it upon your traveling partner. Is this rude or selfish? No. We want you to be aware. If you pass out, then a mask isn't going on them or you.
3. Enjoying Art
   * Good art helps you see things differently, from different angles. This helps you attach significance, mood, emotion, or meaning to things that would otherwise get glossed over.

#### 3 Summary Principles
1. Self-care, like an oil change, increases the **longevity** of our ability to love God and love others.
2. Self-care, like airpline instructions, increases our **availability** to love God and love others.
3. Self-care, like enjoying art, increases the **capacities** with which we can love God and love others.

#### Contrast with Selfishness
1. Selfishness does not care about the longevity, availability, or capacity to love God and love others.
2. Selfishness focuses on the optimal enjoyment of one's own life to the neglect of loving God and others.

#### Theological Foundation
* There is a theological point that needs more attention if we are going to engage this question well; namely we are embodied souls. Our bodies have strong influence over our souls. When we neglect our bodies, it becomes more difficult to express the virtues our Christian souls want to express. Jesus acknowledged as much when he said to his sleepy disciples that the spirit is willing, but your flesh is weak in Matthew 26:41.
* If we allow our bodies to deteriorate we will begin to notice diminishing returns in ministry and effectiveness. The longer we are in a place, the more returns we might get.

### ***A Definition and Examination of Burnout

#### A Case Study: Bob
Started off, everybody wanted to be like Bob. Ends up burned out.

#### What is Burnout?
* Burnout is a popular psychology term, so it's hard to define. It is not a DSM term.
* Not just fatigue. Would go away after a 3 day weekend.
* More than stress. Would go away after finishing a project.
* Depression gets closer, but doesn't cover everything. Somewhat jaded.
* Closest parallel: A mid-life crisis than can hit at any age.
   * Why am I giving all of this for that?
   * We are giving ourselves to something because we think it is worth it.
* Burnout is not the purple heart of ministry! Discourage this perspective.

#### How does Burnout Develop?
* Stage One: Caring and Effective
   * Deeply care about something and decently effective.
   * People who aren't passionate or effective don't tend to burnout.
* Stage Two: Unrealistic Discipline
   * Every opportunity feels like an assignment.
   * Think I have 200 hours of stuff I have to get done... Then at least 32 hours are outside the will of God. God's direction stays within his fairness and provision. Only 168 hours have been given. He will only give us 168 hours of stuff.
* Stage Three: Fatigue (normal)
   * What you do HERE is very important.
   * Things go from bad to worse when we go to stage 4.
   * Critical juncture.
   * Can I talk to the person above me on the organizational chart?
* Stage Four: Guilt-based motivation
   * Come on man.. Can't you do this? Jesus gave it all.. why can't you?
   * DO NOT USE THIS ONE ON MY WIFE EITHER.
   * Using conscience as a whipping rod to feel bad about things that we shouldn't. Yikes.
   * Choice between piano and quitting example.
* Stage Five: Calloused, Cynical
   * Have mutual friendships that you protect. When in ministry this can be hard because people want your time because they want something from you, not just you.
   * Maintain these friendships.
* Stage Six: Crisis (sometimes)
   * Can be big or little.
* Stage Seven: Realization (hope)
   * Don't get back on the merry-go-round!

#### What causes Burnout?
* Burnout is never caused by a SINGLE area of life. Burnout is a function of our total life management. One area of life cannot get out of order without overt choices of neglect being made in other areas of life. This means that if we managed the other areas of our life well, it would have contained the area that was the primary cause of burnout. We must resist the temptation to blame life, or even one area of our life management, for the experience of burnout. **Burnout is a result of how we have managed our life as a whole.**

#### Creating a Time Budget
* Why? God's will fits within God's provision. God honors our finiteness more than we do.
   * 50 Hours of sleep
   * 50 hours of work
   * 17 Hours family and/or key relationships. (A tithe of my week)
   * 51 Hours for everything else.
      * Life maintenance.
      * Recreation.
      * Service.
* Do a time budget with Tamara. This sounds fun.

#### Exodus 18:13-18
* What you are doing is not good. You will certainly wear yourselves out, for this thing is too heavy for you.
   * Not good is not the quality of Moses' work, but the amount of time it takes.
   * Ingredients of being good is sustainability.
* Observations
1. Family saw the problem first.
2. God, nor Moses, condemn Zipporah for talking to Jethro.
3. Ministry was growing rapidly.
4. "What you're doing is not good."
5. Moses was mature enough to receive what Jethro had to say.
6. Unsustainable ministry is not good for Moses or those being served.
   * Everybody below you feels like this is the way it has to be done.
7. **God honors our finitude more than we do.**
   * Pre-fall there was a day of rest! Did they sleep? Maybe? Did they rest? Definitely.

#### 6 Possible Next Steps
1. Talk and trust up the org chart.
2. Think stewardship, not achievement.
   * What are my roles? How can I allot the appropriate time to them? Don't have to achieve the best of these everyday.
3. Pray to your Father, not heavenly bossman.
   * Often we treat God as an employer, not a good father. We won't get promoted.
4. Have non-functional friends. (When the time together is just about the time together.)
5. Practice stillness.
   * The Whole life by Eliza and Esther
   * A Still and Quiet Mind by Esther Smith
6. [Grow in negative emotion tolerance.](www.bradhambrick.com/net)
   * Untangling Emotions book

### Q&A - Class Discussion
* Hypochondriac view of hard stuff. How do we approach them?
   * What is the heart or root cause? Why is there preoccupation?
   * In my own head, I always win. When we bring it out, it becomes much less convincing.
* How do we bring a concern to a peer?
   * Disposition of the person comes into play.
   * Is the pace a spring or marathon? How long can you keep this pace up?
   * Talk about either you being sustainable or you being a jerk. Ha.
   * Do people feel permission?
   * Missionary culture: Driven. Hell vs Heaven battle everyday.
   * Is there freedom for conversation?

"It is not that I am too busy, it is I am finite."
* List between 3 and 5 primary roles in my life. Rank them. Give them time then.

---

[Back to BCO5500](/notes/bco5500)