---
title: Notes 11/29/23
author: Lane Willis
type: page
nav_order: 4
created: 2023-11-29
parent: BCO5500
grand_parent: Classes

---

<details closed markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Table of contents
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }
1. TOC
{:toc}
</details>

---

## Counseling and Restorative Church Discipline

### Introduction and Pre-Stage One Church Discipline
* See Google Doc for Church Discipline shared with us. Download this.
   * Church discipline was becoming elder discipline at Summit.
   * It was also taking so much of the elder's time when they got involved.
   * Write policy as a letter to make it more personal.
      * Church Discipline policy written as a letter to the recipient of discipline.
* Make sure that receiving church discipline is not the first time they hear about church discipline.
   * Put church discipline in the church membership process/course.
   * Many people may not have a category for this.
* This process is meant to be restorative.
* The consequences (Church Membership) are chosen by the member.
   * In that sense, the conclusion of this process – if the concern proves to be valid – *will be chosen by you, not the church,* on the basis of whether you choose to repent of your sin and actively pursue a holy life.
* Matthew 18:15-20
* Discussed difference between someone coming to counseling for care and the counselor coming to the person in sin for church discipline. Different approach and sphere.

#### Pre-Stage One: Confession
* *Before* it is the responsibility of another believer to address an area of sin in your life, it is your responsibility to confess sin and seek change (James 5:16). As a member of a church, you are to view the awareness and support of your fellow believers as a protection from God, not an invasion of privacy.
* Most things for church discipline can be hidden and grow over time.
   * This means the agency and responsibility is on the individual believer.
* To whom have you made these sins known for accountability and change? Could they be part of the restoration team?
* How have you sought to hide the presence/growth of these sins?
   * Reference to David and Bathsheba and how Scripture spends more time on hiding the sin than the sin itself.
   * You are never going to be free when you have access to that sinful choice.
   * Is this accurate? Is this complete?
* Who have you lied to or hidden from during the growth of your sin?
   * These will be people in need of care.

### Stages One to Three Church Discipline

#### Stage One: Individual Confrontation
* When one believer sees another believer living in sin it is their duty to lovingly and humbly bring this concern to the attention of their friend. Even if done imperfectly, who has raised concerns about this area of sin? Do you believe these individuals are willing to be a part of your restoration process/team?
   * How did the conversation go?
   * What efforts were made to change?
   * What did repentance look like?
   * Adultery and nanny found out example. Nanny confronted and was fired. How did you respond? What did you tell your family about why you fired the nanny?

#### Stage Two: Collective Confrontation
* Reviewing this document with an elder is evidence that you are, at least potentially, at this stage of church discipline. We want you to know that this is called "church" discipline process for a reason; it involves the church. In the plan that we will develop WITH (not for) you in the pages that follow, we will be involving more than the elder team because your restoration should be worked out in your community.

#### Stage Three: Church-Wide Confrontation
* You need to understand that if you are unwilling to profess your need for the gospel and actively engage in removing these sins we will – as an act of love – call on the larger church (your campus) to relate to you as your life indicates that God sees you; that is, as an unsaved individual whom God loves but is not a part of his covenant family – a non-Christian.
   * This is not what we desire, but your response to the first stage of God’s protection (either by resistance, passivity, or hiding your sin) leads us to believe it is appropriate to warn you of the implication of continued persistence in your sin.
   * This is the announcement from pulpit stage. Probably done at member meeting. Discontinue fellowship here.
   * **This is how far you would get in conversation 1.**

### Q&A
* How would this change if it is a staff member?
   * Bifocals: Church Discipline and HR responsibilities.
   * Some of this is how your HR contract is worded.
   * Two different standards here. On staff versus member.
      * On staff: Above Reproach.
         * Am I living above reproach?
      * Member: Humble and Repentant.
   * Removing from staff could occur while church discipline is ongoing. May be the only option.
   * Restoration to membership, not ministry. These are not synonymous.
      * Ministry is not about being gifted.
   * You will win trust if you communicate clearly to the congregation.
      * Link to News Article is an easy way.
      * Don't tell them there is no reason for concern. We don't know this. Ha.
* What is the process of restoring to ministry?
   * Depends on what exactly they did to disqualify themselves.
   * Dr. Hambrick: If they abused their role or power, you don't put them back in that decision.
* Question about more high profile situations in the SBC. How do we deal with this?
   * Shows a need to document responses and help make quality decisions.
   * In high profile places, the church discipline may need to occur outside just the local church to decrease bias.
* We are evaluating cooperation, not progress.
   * If we have cooperation, but not progress, then we need to reevaluate the plan.
      * Do we have the right approach?
   * If we don't have cooperation, we need to reevaluate the person.
* The more public the figure is, and the more public the knowledge of sin is, the more detailed the response and report needs to be, as well as the more public these need to be.
   * I am talking to other people for other people, not about other people.

### Restoration Plan of Church Discipline

#### Introduction
* The more disrupted our life becomes, the more intentionality we must bring to restoring order. This principle is true whether the life disruption is caused by sin, folly, or suffering. That is the purpose of this document and the process it facilitates. We want to partner with you to bring a high level of intentionality to your restoration process.
* However, if this is going to be effective, **it must be your plan.** We are coming alongside of you to make your plan a better plan and to ensure that key people, sins, or effects of sin are not neglected. If you are sincere in your desire to follow Christ and to be free from the sin(s) that led to this conversation, we want to rally the Body of Christ to walk alongside you to victory.
* We know the deceptiveness of sin. We are not immune to it. Scripture warns that we are all prone to be double-minded (James 1:7); wanting to change and not wanting to change.
That is why we say - if you are not committed to walking in repentance and faith, we want your lack of commitment to the things that freedom from sin would require to be obvious to you as a warning.
* As sinners, we are all prone to deceive ourselves when our heart is divided, make our situation worse, hurt more people that we love, and use the sense of being overwhelmed as an excuse to give up or blame others. We don’t want that for you.
* **Warning:** An unwillingness to be honest and cooperative with this process is a sign that you are more committed to preserving your sin than honoring Christ. Yes, this is hard statement to hear. But continuing to deny or avoid your sin in isolation from the church with which you have covenanted is not an option.

#### Accurately Define the Problem, its development, and impact
* Concretely define the history, growth, and current expression of your sin.
   * *You will never be more free from sin than you are honest.*
* List the people affected by your sin and describe the effects.
   * *Self-centered thinking leads us into sin; other-minded thinking leads us away from sin.*
* Resources for Defining the Problem and Assessing Motivation:
   * These resources are drawn from subject-specific seminars (mainly addiction-related), but the underlying principles are relevant to any pattern of immoral behavior that has (a) become deeply ingrained, (b) relies on secrecy, and (c) is resistant to change in spite of its destructive effects.
   * See notes from early lectures.
* List the key changes that need to occur in order to evidence fruit in keeping with repentance (Matt. 3:8).
   * What would you have to do? This needs to be YOUR plan not the church's.
   * Include life practices.
   * Workout plan example. It can't be too involved. Let's get you started.

#### Involve the Right People in a Wise Process
* Accountability
   * Ask several people to be a part of the restoration team.
   * This document will be shared with them and help them know what their role is on the team.
   * Remember, you do not have accountability (passive mindset); you make yourself accountable (active mindset). **No one who is caring for you should have to ask “the right question” to get needed information.**
      * The less you volunteer the relevant information, the more invasive you will feel like your care team is being and the more “unfair” or “silly” you will feel the entire process to be.
      * Each member of your care team is voluntarily serving you out of their love for you and Christ. Honor their service by cooperating in such a way that their service produces the fruit of a changed life they are praying God will give you.
   * Assessment of Accountability: If you were honest with the people above about the questions listed, would there be key areas of change (areas of sin or times of temptation) that would be neglected? If so, what? Update your plan (list of key changes and people involved) accordingly.
   * To Whom, When / Where / Frequency, About What, Contact Information
* ***Counseling and Church Discipline
   * At your first/next session, ask your counselor to create a release of information.
      * The counselee makes the request!
      * The request needs to be specific for the elder/pastor overseeing the process. Speak to one person, not a team of people. This needs to be the person in charge.
   * When you go, take the current draft copy of this restoration plan to your counselor.
      * Allows counselor to have all the information needed as well.
   * An initial conversation will be had between the elder and counselor to review the restoration plan and define the counselor's role.
      * What amount of weight can the church help alleviate? This enables the counselee to bear stress in a better way.
      * How often will progress/reports be made?
      * We would love for your work to be wind in our sails.
   * Please understand, when counseling occurs as part of church discipline, the counselor's role is not "to advocate for you" (like an attorney seeking a plea bargain) but to assist you towards the character goals set forth in the restoration plan and provide a more objective-experienced voice to the elders about the emotional-relational-addictive obstacles that may be impairing progress.
* Legal, Medical, or Clinical Advisement
   * Can be beneficial. Must also get a release of information in these instances so it can work in tandem with the restoration process.
   * My attorney asked me not to answer that question.
      * When the sheep goes mute and dumb, we need to think flock thoughts to guard our congregation.
* Signature is for permission to share information more broadly.
   * Include a release to another church if member chooses to leave during the process.

#### Track Follow Through and Have Tangible Markers of Progress
* Document includes note-taking process.

---

[Back to BCO5500](/notes/bco5500)