---
title: Notes 11/8/23
author: Lane Willis
type: page
nav_order: 2
created: 2023-11-08
parent: BCO5500
grand_parent: Classes

---

<details closed markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Table of contents
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }
1. TOC
{:toc}
</details>

---

## Notes Same Sex Attraction and Gender Dysphoria

### Sexual Disciples
1. Every person we disciple is gendered and experiences some form of sexual desire.
   1. We are gendered and sexual beings.
      * Genesis 1:27-28
      * Don't teach gender by stereotype. We make too many generalizations.
2. God created gender and sexuality. He declared them good.
   * Genesis 1:31
3. The Fall effects both our personal and cultural experience of gender and sexuality.
   * Romans 8:22-23
4. Any discipleship that does not address our struggles as gendered, sexual beings will be incomplete. (Holistic Discipleship)
   * 2 Corinthians 5:17 - We are new creations! Yet, we are new creations with a history. Needs to be addressed. Our habits and personalities don't evaporate.
   * Our sins and difficulties won't just be left behind when we are saved.
5. Our culture is happy to fill the church's silence.
   * Ephesians 5:11-13 - "Shameful to even speak of it" - not 100% literal. We cannot be silent.
   * Shame versus guilt. Shame often is felt when something happens TO us. Guilt often is felt when we DO something.
   * DNOW example: sin, secrets, and shame.
   * Anger is not the opposite of silence.

### Understanding the Experience of Unwanted Same Sex Attraction and Gender Dysphoria
2-Fold Purpose of this section
1. Educate you on the subject matter.
2. Prepare you to give talks on awkward subjects.

#### We are Not Discussing a Subject
* If you are here and experience unwanted same sex attraction, I am glad you are here. I appreciate your trust and your courage.
* I hope that you find this discussion honors your experience and makes it easier for you to talk with others.
* I am sorry for the times you have felt like a subject to be debated more than a person to be heard, cared for, and understood. We stop seeing the people when a conversation becomes political.
   * Hope to set a tone that they were not expecting. Try not to be an us/them conversation, but a we are together conversation.
   * Also did not apologize in the sense that the church is wrong with what we believe, but did apologize for the ways of asserting our rightness.

#### *Do Ask, Do Tell, Let's Talk: Why and How Christians Should Have Gay Friends* by Dr. Hambrick
* Prompt - Asked by a peer. Second, number of people he would meet in counseling that have not been able to talk to others about this. A dissatisfied appreciation due to lack of friends/community to walk with in these issues.
* Hesitancy - I don't care that much about this subject. If you are going to write a book, you need to be passionate. This may be one where passion is a liability.
* Audience - Opposite sex attracted church. Not writing to the gay community.

#### ***3 Question or Lenses (Have overlap like a Venn Diagram) (Yarhouse?)
* What is right? (Ethics)
   * When is this sinful? What is God's original design?
   * Integrity lens.
* What is hard? (Suffering)
   * Lens of suffering.
   * Just because aspects of this are bad, doesn't mean nothing about this is hard.
   * We need to be sympathetic and understanding.
   * Disability lens
* Where do I belong? (Community)
   * Bathroom and locker room discussions become forefront.
   * "Divide up boys and girls." Where do I belong occurs?
* Our focus will be more on **what is hard?**
   * **All three questions are important.** Too often, however, conversations degenerate into debates about which question gets to be at the forefront.
   * Most of ministry is going to happen in the circle of hard/suffering.

#### What about 1 Corinthians 5:9-11?
How do we reconcile befriending those with SSA with Paul's words in 1 Corinthians?
**SEE CHART DISPLAYED**
   * Level of struggle (y-axis)
      * Experiencing temptation, succumbing to temptation, repeatedly falling to temptation, no longer calling the tempting action wrong.
   * Category of people (x-axis)
     * Non-Christian, Exploring Faith, Professing Christian
We want to avoid the dark spaces and stop allowing people to migrate there.
* Fundamentalist discussion during class. Moving from set of beliefs to a disposition.
   * Conservative is beginning to get this way. "Angry with the right people in the right way"

#### Starting Friendships
* **Speak sympathetically to the struggle of SSA.** Humble statements can go a long way.
   * "I can only imagine how hard it woudl be to experience unwanted same-sex attractoin and feel caught in so many cultural debates. Trying to figure out who to talk to might be as hard as anything else. That would be incredibly lonely."
* A statement like this in social contexts where homosexuality is being debated raises a flag of peace to be seen by those looking for a safe friend.

#### The Experience of SSA
* The experience of having a secret.
   * You can't easily receive love and praise because of the thought, "If you only knew."
* The experience of "I didn't choose this."
   * Not just a simple choice. If we make it appear this way, we make it seem like we don't want to know them.
* The experience of "It's not all about sex."
   * There are a whole lot of things about attraction that are not sexual.
   * This often says a lot more about us than it does them. We oversexualize things.

#### ***From SSA to a Gay Identity
1. Initial experience of SSA
   * When do we the church invite conversation?
   * If what we do in the church never invites a conversation until somebody has reached level 4, our silence has contributed to this failure.
2. Behaviors in response to SSA
3. The question of identity.
   * If the only narrative that exists is the dominant cultural narrative, then when a person experiences SSA, it can only mean they are gay. Are there other categories?
   * Difference between unwanted SSA, gay identity, or homosexual behavior.
   * When we do gender by stereotype, we make this a harder question.
4. The Milestone of disclosure.
   * An uninvited conversation creates a more FORCEFUL dialogue.
   * This one is a big deal. "I think this is who I am."
5. The establishment of a same-sex relationship.
   * "Gay Marriage" is going to be happy-ever-after in our current age and involves sacrifice.
   * This makes divorce here a hard reality to swallow.

* If we think ministry happens at point 4, **WE ARE LATE.**
   * The most fruitful area of ministry occurs at numbers 1 and 2.

#### Being an openly Christian Friend
* If you are going to be my openly gay friend, then I need to be able to be your openly Christian friend and you be okay with it.
* Difficult questions and moments:
   * Are you trying to convert me?
      * This is important to me and might sound compelling. If we are going to be real friends, I want to have the freedom to talk about my faith in an excited and potentially compelling way. I want you to be as honest with me as I want to be as honest with you.
   * Do you believe someone can be a "gay Christian"?
      * A lot of this depends on what you mean. In general, I prefer we not put adjectives in front of the word Christian. Christian is my identity. Adjective is detracting.
      * Becoming a Christian doesn't take my SSA away. I decided Jesus is more than my sexuality. A Christian who is experiencing unwanted SSA doesn't roll off the tongue.
      * A person cannot be submitted to the Lordship of Christ and be living in sin.
   * Would you come to my wedding?
      * First thought, thank you. The fact you know I am a Christian and you value our friendship that you are willing to engage me and invite me to your wedding means a lot. Your wedding is your day. Speak now or forever hold your peace. I don't feel like that is something in good conscience I could do. I really value our friendship. I know what my presence at a wedding would mean. I don't want to be a fly in your soup.
      * When I lose relationship, I lose the opportunity to influence. I also don't want to compromise.

#### My Goal for Our Time Together
* I want, in our friendships, for us to be able to step out of a culture war and see a person.
* I want us to create church cultures where young people struggling with same sex attraction feel like they can talk about their experience.
* I want how we approach this subject to represent God's compassion as much as (no less than) it dispenses God's truth.
* You can have conversations that don't compromise and still have a primary focus that is compassionate toward those we are called to minister to. If they don't want to listen. Shake the dust off your feet and move on. They are not ready.

### Q&A - Class Discussion
What are some general guidelines and principles? No silver bullet.
* How you use your list when you preach and teach. Giving examples that cover larger topics.
   * If you put it on the list, you open the door for conversation.
* We don't want children to walk in silence.
Minor comes up and says they are navigating SSA and doesn't want to tell parents. How do we navigate this?
* Not a one size fits all. Need to steer at some point to the parents. But not immediately. We don't have to rush this, but we do need to get there.
* What are your fears in telling your parents? Do you need a buffer? How can we help you get there?
How do lust and SSA play together?
* I want them to know that I am not equating the two. But, lustfully feeding this will make it stronger not less. Each time that you do, does it make your appetite stronger or lesser? Stronger. We are not creating relief. Eliminating lust doesn't eliminate SSA.

---

[Back to BCO5500](/classes/semester-6/bco5500/bco5500.html)