---
title: EMS Paper
author: Lane Willis
type: page
nav_order: 2
created: 2023-10-19
parent: Work
permalink: EMS

---

# EMS Paper - How A Greater Understanding of Ecclesiology Will Help our Church Members in Evangelism and our Future Church Planters Missiologically
{: .no_toc }

---

<details closed markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Table of contents
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }
1. TOC
{:toc}
</details>

---

## Abstract

## Paper

### Introduction

What makes a church a church? At first glance, this question seems simplistic. Yet, when one sits down to consider the depths of ecclesiology and the varying expressions of the church in the world, this topic becomes exponentially more robust. Is the church a building? Is it a people? Is the church a local expression or a universal body? How does one differentiate between a small Bible study and a local assembly? Are both churches? Where is the difference? When does the small Bible study become a church if it is not one? Is a church defined by its characteristics, goals, or functions? As one considers ecclesiology, the above are just some questions that surface. From the peppering, one can see the lack of clarity arising in considering church. Yet, where does one begin with so much confusion?
Amidst all this turmoil surrounding the church, we must ask, what is the process of identifying a church? Put another way, when looking at a group of Christ followers, what exactly makes them a church? This paper will limit itself to discussions on the ontological characteristics of a church, while not considering topics such as church health, church discipline, or specific church practice. This paper is on local church expression rather than the universal church, but it will delineate the difference between the two at the start. This paper will seek to differentiate between three expressions of the local church: the Catholic church, the house church, and the current Baptist church. Ultimately, this paper will defend the Baptist expression of church found in the Baptist Faith and Message 2000 while also expanding on this definition to help identify the process of establishing a church. Lastly, this paper will show how ecclesiology applies to myself and other believers in fellowship, discipleship, and missiology.

### Theological Perspectives
As mentioned above, the concept of church seems simple at first, but when one begins to wade into the depths of ecclesiology, one begins to realize the vast nature of this doctrine. The Oxford Learner’s Dictionary defines church as either a building, a service in a church, a group of Christians, or the institution of the Christian religion.  As one can see from these varying definitions, what the church is can be confusing. Because ecclesiology can be vast in its spectrum, this paper must set limits and make distinctions between differing definitions. Many people have a concept of church but may not understand what forms the basis of the church. This section will serve as our introduction to three definitions of the church and set the foundation for how followers of Christ have viewed church over the last few centuries. This section will compare three models of church: the Catholic church, the house church, and the current Baptist church. By diving into these three models of church, this paper will address when a small group becomes a church and how those with this question can seek to move toward church establishment.

The terms we must define at the outset are local church and universal church. To begin, one must differentiate between these two expressions of the church. Allison defines the universal church by saying, 
    “The church consists of two interrelated elements, commonly referred to as the “universal” church and “local” churches. The universal church is the company of all Christians stretching from its inception to Christ’s second coming at the end of this present age. It incorporates both the deceased believers who are currently in the presence of Christ in heaven and the living believers scattered throughout the world.”
As one can see from this definition, the universal church is the united body of believers throughout all of time that shares in the common confession that Jesus Christ is Lord and continues to grow as time proceeds.

Dever defines a local church by saying, “Fundamentally, God intends the local church to be a corporate display of his glory and wisdom, both to unbelievers and to unseen spiritual powers. More specifically, we are a corporate dwelling place for God’s Spirit, the organic body of Christ in which he magnifies his glory.”  Thus, a local church seems to be an area-specific expression of the universal church that displays the glory of God to the surrounding community. The Baptist Faith and Message 2000 defines a local church by saying, “The local church is an autonomous local congregation of baptized believers, associated by covenant in the faith and fellowship of the gospel.”  Ultimately, one can see that the local church is a local expression of the universal church. So, when this paper speaks of a local church, it speaks of an area-specific expression of the universal church. 

Now that terms are defined, this paper can shift its focus to presenting three expressions of the local church. As mentioned above, these three expressions are the Catholic expression, the house church expression, and the Baptist church expression. This section will present a definition and theologians for each expression. As this paper moves through different expressions of the local church, one can see how differing premises lead to differing results in the basic church unit. A differing starting point can influence how people envision local church formation and how people envision the local church should function.

The first expression of a local church is that of the Catholic Church. In AD 381 the Council of Constantinople affirmed belief in “one, holy, catholic, and apostolic church.”  This is one of the earliest expressions established by the church. By one, the Catholic church means unified. By holy, the Catholic church means set apart by God. By catholic, the Catholic Church means universal, and by apostolic, the Catholic church claims apostolic origins. Earlier, this paper dealt with an explanation of the distinction between the universal and local church. It is at this foundational point that the Catholic Church shifts. 

The Catholic Church, identifying with the words one and catholic, proposes that the church is a theological entity rather than a local expression, and affirms that when Paul uses ekklesia, he intends the universal church and not the local church.  Catholics shift the focus of the church from a local expression to a universal one, unifying the church and declaring that it can never be more than one entity. Thus, the denominations that have broken off from the Catholic Church are unorthodox and in rebellion. Ultimately, this affirmation leads Catholics to declare that the church is a vehicle for salvation and the dispensation of grace. Thus, the ideas of the local and universal church merge, to where the local expression of a church is just a manifestation of the universal church centered in Rome and led by the papacy. Some theologians that support this viewpoint are Karl Rahner and Thomas Aquinas. The Catholic Church also uses writings from Augustine, Ignatius, and other Church Fathers in their methodology. With the Catholic model of church, the answer to when a Bible study becomes a church is easy. It never does because there is only one church!

The second model of the local church presented is the house church model. Today, the house church seems new and hip, but the premise of house churches has been around for two thousand years. Gehring states, “In all three phases of early Christian mission, the house served as the basic foundation for all church life.”  In his book, Gehring argues that the premise of the house church has been around for a long time and has been vital to the development of the local church. Ultimately, Gehring tries to show that Paul utilized the founding of house churches to advance the Gospel and set up Gospel-centered communities. Although the house church model was a favorite in the early church, the Catholic Church model and other protestant models surpassed it. Today, the missional house church is revitalizing, as many people desire to join this kind of church.

Payne gives a set of attributes to describe house churches in Missional House Churches. Payne says house churches are organic, simple, participatory in worship, community-driven, and celebrate equality in ministerial roles (with no one being the head/lead pastor).  As Payne elaborates on these attributes, one can see that a house church tends to be smaller, driven by being known and vulnerable in community as one reads the Word of God and participates in worship. House churches tend to jettison structure, buildings, and titles, embracing simplicity in life and worship. Overall these churches seek to make disciples through a vulnerable, dynamic community. Payne points out that these churches often have healthy expressions of fellowship, high levels of accountability and transparency, and utilize ministry funds well.  Henderson agrees with Payne as he urges his readers to take note of the number of disciples. He encourages his readers by saying that the basic unit of the church must be small enough to facilitate intimacy, accountability, responsibility, and strong relationships.  From Payne, Gehring, and Henderson, the house church model can be beneficial in certain areas yet tend to move against the grain and reject some semblance of authority. When reflecting upon this model, it can be unclear when a Bible study becomes a house church.

The last expression of churches that this paper presents is that of the current Baptist church. As mentioned above, the Baptist expression of church is the expression that this paper seeks to defend. This expression has a wide range of definitions and attributes from different theologians. This section will briefly introduce some theologians and provide a fuller definition from the Baptist Faith and Message 2000. The Baptist Faith and Message 2000 states that a local church is: 
    “An autonomous local congregation of baptized believers, associated by covenant in the faith and fellowship of the gospel; observing the two ordinances of Christ, governed by His laws, exercising the gifts, rights, and privileges invested in them by His Word, and seeking to extend the gospel to the ends of the earth.” 
From this definition, one can see that the current expression of Baptist churches says that a local church is an area-specific congregation of people who hold to the same confession, have been baptized, covenant together in faith and fellowship, seek to rightly preach and teach the Word of God, and seek to reach the nations with the Gospel. This definition shows us that the congregation must covenant together under the right preaching of the Gospel, practice the ordinances installed by Christ, and be governed/led in a specific way as designated by the Word of God. Thus, a Bible study is still a Bible study and not a church until it practices the ordinances and is led and governed by an elder called out by God.

Some Baptist theologians such as Dever, Hammett, and Allison have presented their flavor of the definition given above and given their attributes or marks to identify a church. Dever simplifies this definition, as well as the Catholic definition above, by echoing the Reformers. Dever lists two marks of the church: the right preaching of the Word of God and the proper administration of the ordinances.  Hammett presents his variation of these marks by saying that the church is God’s organized, purposeful, local, living, Gospel-centered, Spirit-empowered assembly.  Allison gives seven attributes for the identification of a church. He states that the church must be doxological, logocentric, pneuma-dynamic, covenantal, confessional, missional, and eschatological.  Allison adds that from these seven attributes flows church function and government. Allison links these two together and shows how these separate areas cannot be siloed but depend on one another. Overall, from the brief overview of these theologians, a pattern emerges in identifying a church. Common marks include covenantal, missional, local, Gospel-centered, and right preaching.

### Theological Position

At this point, I turn to the defense of the Baptist expression of a local church. I affirm that the Baptist expression listed above is the most accurate representation of the church and helps us identify how a Bible study becomes a church. As I have been studying ecclesiology, I have arrived at my definition of church: A local church is an area-specific expression of believers who are called out by God to share in a common confession and to covenant together, serving and loving each other as they pursue spiritual formation through the practice of the ordinances and the preaching of the Word. Comparing this to the Baptist Faith and Message 2000, it becomes clear that my definition is just a rephrasing of this definition above. To support my assertion, I will identify uses of the Hebrew and Greek language, theologians (Hammett and Allison), and verses that support this Baptist expression of a local church.

Ultimately, one must look to the Bible for the basis of definition. Hammett points to multiple words, both in Hebrew and Greek, to help form the biblical definition of church. He highlights edah and qahal in Hebrew and ekklesia in Greek to undergird his understanding of church in the Bible. Hammett then explains in the Old Testament, edah and qahal are used to point to congregations or gatherings, but that qahal points to those who have heard a specific call and have chosen to follow it. Thus, because of this distinction, the Septuagint translates qahal with ekklesia. In the New Testament, the church is referred to as synagogue once and as ekklesia 109 times.  Overwhelmingly, ekklesia refers to the assembled church. Thus, it is vital to connect the New Testament usage of ekklesia to qahal. Hammett goes on to show that the New Testament uses ekklesia 90 times to refer to the local church, with 40 times being in the singular, 14 times pointing to all the Christians in one city, and 36 times being in the plural designating local churches in an area.  Gehring comments by saying, “Ecclesiological assertions that transcend the local assembly are quite rare in Paul’s writings, but they do occur.”  Surveying the information provided, it is evident that the New Testament speaks about the church in a way that highlights the local gathering of believers called out by God to serve Him.

A few passages come to mind when thinking about the last pieces of the Baptist expression of the local church. Acts 2:42–47 shows believers gathering locally to celebrate the Lord’s Supper, preach the Word, pray, and do evangelism. Ephesians 4, Galatians 6, and Colossians 3 discuss how believers carry one another’s burdens, pursue maturity together, and love and serve one another, as Christ loved us and gave Himself up for us. Paul encourages the church to pursue sound doctrine and proper teaching in Titus 1 and often speaks of opposing false prophets and guarding the truth of the deposit that he passed on to them. Thus, as one reads through Paul’s letters, it is evident that Paul views the church as a who, not a what, and that this who is the people of God, called by Him to participate in fellowship and service towards one another. Hammett summarizes this well by saying, “churches can be and are valid and yet imperfect. But if a church errs on the gospel, they have become not just imperfect, but invalid; they are no longer a church, according to the biblical portrayal of the church.”  Consequently, Hammett points us to the realization that if the Gospel of Jesus Christ as Lord is not preached rightly, the church ceases to be a church. This enables us to contend that the right preaching of the Word is again a must and why Paul vehemently defends the Gospel spoken rightly.

### Objections

Current objections to the Baptist expression of church come from multiple angles. This section discusses the objections of the Catholic Church and house church members. The Catholic Church, which views the singular unity of the universal church as a theological entity, contends that Baptists have muddied the waters and diluted the church theologically. Some object that the individualistic nature of Baptist life and the expression of the local church has created a lack of unity and clarity in doctrine.  They contend local units of churches should be unified and uniform in practice, are symbolic, localized expressions of the universal church, and do not have any authority. Catholics also object to Baptist ecclesiology and the mark of baptism and regenerated church membership.  In doing so, they put forth different interpretations of the words of the Bible and the Church Fathers. Today, denominations fill the words “one, holy, catholic, and apostolic” with various meanings, bending these words to their assumptions. In response to Catholics, I would point back to the argument surrounding the usage of ekklesia and the repeated emphasis by Paul on local church authority.

House church model members object to the current Baptist expression of church by saying that the current Baptist model falls short of the New Testament model for church. Those who leave to start house churches or join house churches say that they leave the established church because, in its establishment, there are shortcomings.  Others critique the church because of the pain they have suffered from members or leaders of the church body. Others say that the current Baptist model is too traditional or ancient and are looking for the next big thing in our consumerist culture. Some of these critiques may try to be biblically based, but others seem to arise out of pain. To answer these objections, I would respond that the church is full of sinful people who have not yet been glorified to a state of sinlessness in heaven. Thus, as we live on this earth, the church will be broken and make mistakes. However, this affirmation does not allow people to pursue division just because they can. The Bible calls us to unity in Christ and urges believers to maintain unity in the Gospel. We are to put first what is of utmost importance (Christ) and live as He calls us to live in this world.

### Integration and Conclusion
At this moment, one might ask how this applies to their life. Those in a Baptist church might wonder what difference this 
question and this doctrine make in how they live. I present three areas of application to consider in answering this inquiry: fellowship, discipleship, and missiology. The first area of application in accepting the Baptist expression of church is that of our fellowship with other believers. When we view the church not as a building, but as the people called out by God that covenant together to pursue maturity, our fellowship becomes more meaningful. Ultimately, this viewpoint helps us point each other to Christ in greater ways because we are accountable to one another. We are to bear one another’s burdens and point them to Christ in all things. We are to act differently toward believers. Jesus has called us to love our brothers and to be one as He and the Father are one. Our fellowship with other believers must look different if we accept the Baptist expression of the church.

A second application for the Baptist expression of church is in the realm of discipleship and evangelism. When we view church as the regenerated people, it affects how we disciple and introduce people to Christ. Nonbelievers are not only saved from sin, but they are saved by God, into the church, and onto mission. Thus, when people accept the Gospel and place their faith in Jesus, they are saved into the church and are called to participate in a local church through the observance of the ordinances. The local church should aid them in their discipleship and growth as they all seek Jesus together! A third application for the Baptist expression of church is in the realm of missiology. My wife and I desire to serve overseas in a context with minimal Gospel presence. This might mean that these areas do not even have a church. How would we go about starting a church? By diving deep into the Baptist expression of church and formulating a definition myself with distinct marks, we can confidently plant churches that seek to glorify Christ in all things.

Overall, it has been the thrust of this paper to show how the Baptist expression of the local church enables us to identify what makes a church a church. I have argued that the Baptist definition of church from the Baptist Faith and Message 2000 clearly articulates a biblical definition and enables us to rightly identify a church. This discussion has helped us see how a Bible study is not a church but might become one. If we apply the definition above to a Bible study, we will find that this Bible study cannot identify as a local church because it lacks pieces of the definition above. So how does one go from a Bible study to a church? Leeman summarizes this transition for us by saying, “This happens when a group of Christians physically gathers together, agrees upon the gospel to be preached, undertakes a naming ceremony (baptism), and then enjoys a regular family meal that affirms both the gospel and their unity (the Lord’s Supper).”  Ultimately, in the Baptist expression of church, a Bible study becomes a church by congregating around a common confession and practicing the ordinances.


---

[Back to Work](/work/work.html)