---
title: Notes 10/19/23
author: Lane Willis
type: page
nav_order: 1
created: 2023-10-19
parent: EVA5100
grand_parent: Classes

---

## Notes

### Evangelistic Discovery Bible Studies

#### Look Back
1. The gospel is the **true story of the whole world**, not just a list of propositions.
   * According to the Scriptures.
   * 1 Corinthians 15:1-6
2. Jesus shared the gospel in the context of the whole **grand narrative** following his resurrection.
   * Beginning with Moses
   * Luke 24:13-35
3. The gospel is **exclusive, contextual, central,** and our **priority.**
   * We tend to make people big and God small. (Pluralism)
   * The exclusivity of this message should breed compassion and gratitude.

#### Look Up
* Stats
   * Over 60% of people are open to hearing what the Bible says. (Barna study)
   * 60 or 70% are resistant to going to church though. Crazy.
   * Study on beliefs about the Bible - 55% believe the Bible is the Word of God.
   * 50% of people think the Bible is relevant for life.
* Evangelistic DBS move the focus to what the Scripture says about the gospel as the basis for our response.
   * Ethiopian Eunuch is an example of a DBS.
   * Acts 8:26-40, Isaiah 56:3-6.
   * This kind of DBS give you the opportunity to model basic hermeneutical principles.
* SWORD Method
   * Sin: What is it that defames God's character? Not just the action. But in relationship to God. What are they doing to dishonor God?
* [Seven Arrows](https://www.thegospelcoalition.org/blogs/trevin-wax/7-arrows-for-bible-reading/)
* Evangelistic Discovery Bible Studies:
   * 7 Stories of Hope
   * The Story

### Evangelism that Leads to Discipleship

#### Look Up
We don't want to disconnect our evangelism from our discipleship and have "knowledge" conversions. It can't just be curriculum. No scorecard for success. It needs to go from lessons taught to relationships established.
Principles:
1. Disciple-making is as much about relational "withness" as it is about content and curriculum.
2. Don't add discipleship events to your calendar; instead add people to what you're already doing.
3. If real life and the world aren't your "classroom", then you're answering questions they may not be asking. Which means they aren't likely ready to hear it.
4. MAWLLL

Tools:
* 411
* 7 Basic Commands of Jesus

---

[Back to EVA5100](/classes/semester-6/eva5100/eva5100.html)