---
title: Notes 10/26/23
author: Lane Willis
type: page
nav_order: 2
created: 2023-10-19
parent: EVA5100
grand_parent: Classes

---

## Notes 10/26/23
{: .no_toc }

---

<details closed markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Table of contents
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }
1. TOC
{:toc}
</details>

---

### New Testament Standard for EV

#### Jesus and EV in the Gospels
 * The incarnation was evangelistic in intent.
   * Jesus = God Saves
 * Jesus greatest criticism was to religious leaders.
 * Jesus' ministry modeled EV.
   * He moved from place to place AMONG the broken.
* He demonstrated an evangelistic zeal.
   * Matthew 9:36-38
 * He modeled evangelistic preaching to the masses (Mark 1:14-15).
   * His message was consistent and succinct: The Kingdom of God has come to you.
* He taught about the priority of EV as seen in Luke 15.
   * Parables sheep, coin, son.
   * There is more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents. Care more about lost people than lost possessions or lost revenue.
* He practices personal evangelism.
   * Over 40 accounts in the Gospels of him personally sharing with a variety of people.
   * He SOUGHT people.
   * He was APPROACHABLE.
   * 1 Cor 15 reference.
   * God is Gospel.
* GC passages demand that we evangelize.
* Disciple-making begins among the lost.

#### Paul and EV in Acts and Epistles
* God orchestrated his life experience to prepare him for apostolic ministry.
   * How did your pre-conversion life help to prepare you for ministry.
* Paul’s conversion experience radically shaped him for evangelistic ministry. Acts 9:15
* He used every means possible to evangelize:Paul and EV
   * Mass
   * Household
   * Apologetic
   * Power
   * Teaching - Acts 19 Hall of Tyrannus
   * Literary - NT was written with this intent.
   * Urban
   * Church Planting: he evangelized the networks of early converts and gathered them into the church.
      * CP never mentioned in the Bible, however, is a natural result of making disciples in New areas.
      * CMT mentioned.
* He realized that follow-up of new believers and young believers would generate more evangelistic opportunities via their oikos.
   * Re-visited those he had won.
   * Wrote letters of encouragement to coach and help.
* Paul’s Model for Evangelism
   * The existing church prayed.
   * They evangelized lost people.
   * They discipled new believers.
   * They gathered new believers into churches.
   * They appointed and equipped leaders.
   * Those churches then reproduced new churches.

### How Do We Evaluate Gospel Training Tools?
* Does the resource get the Gospel right?
   * Is the content biblically and theologically sound?
   * Does it focus on the finished work of Christ and not our own works?
   * Does it cover the basics of the Gospel?
      * Substitution
      * Redemption
      * Justification
      * Glorification
* Does this resource get the Gospel across?
   * Is the means of communication effective and clear?
   * Communication Theory on the Board Drawing
   * Is it flexible and adaptable for diverse audiences and cultures?
* Does this resource get the Gospel in?
   * Is it compelling, addressing the mind and heart and will?
   * Does it call for response?
   * Does it establish that we are saved from sin, for God, into the church, and onto God’s mission?
* Does this resource enable and equip everyday believers to reach those far from God?
   * Is it easy to use?
   * Is it simple and reproducible?
   * Will it help mature and grow believers in evangelistic competency and confidence?
   

---

[Back to EVA5100](/notes/eva5100)