---
title: Notes 11/2/23
author: Lane Willis
type: page
nav_order: 3
created: 2023-10-124
parent: EVA5100
grand_parent: Classes

---

## Notes 11/2
{: .no_toc }

---

<details closed markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Table of contents
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }
1. TOC
{:toc}
</details>

---

### Halloween Event

* Discuss genesis of Halloween event, utilizing rhythms that are already ongoing to do ministry instead of adding events or trying to break up rhythms of people far from God.
* 1250 kids that came through. Gave out cards to watch the Story video.
   * 45 already watched the video.
* Allowed those who were present to share.
   * People were so appreciative of free hot chocolate and coffee.
   * Why coffee and hot chocolate? I need to do something to draw the adults in.
   * Parents getting the coffee and hot chocolate. Two lines.

## Community Exegesis

* Very easy to go from Flaherty to Southeastern and forget our calling to be ambassadors.
* When we walk out of our doors, we are surrounded by lostness.
* Read about where you are going. Do research. Know all you can.
* Knowing and reading something doesn't compare to actually being there. However, they are indispensible in regards to doing EV.
* Why am I here today?
* I need to train my eyes and rhythms to remember why I am here.

### Entry Strategies
* Who do you share the Gospel with? How do you engage them?

#### Exegete your community:
   * Understand the history that has shaped those who live there.
      * How has Wake Forest grown and been shaped? Who was here originally?
   * Understand the growth and movements of people.
   * Know and study the ethnic/worldview make-up of the people.
   * Identify and engage the INFLUENCERS
   * Identify the hopes and fears that are shared by the people.
   * Pray for ways to bring the Gospel to bear on their lives.
* Geography: Mapping the Space
   * "Paths" - channels along which people travel from place to place that limit an individual's experience of the city and shape their perspective of it by virtue of who they interact with.
      * Get off the beaten path.
      * Start with a physical map and add to/notate it.
      * Explore different paths asking which group of people might utilize each and how that would shape their worldview.
      * What types of transportation are used and how might that shape the person's experience?
   * "Nodes" - a center of activity where paths cross and different kinds of people intermingle. These are strategic entry points in an area because it is understood that these are places where ideas are exchanged.
      * Behavior often changes in nodes in order to preserve ones culture of origin.
      * The convergence of a diversity of people.
      * The opportunity to spread information to a broad and diverse audience.
      * A guarded posture by most who enter.
   * "Districts" - areas with perceived internal "sameness" such as neighborhoods that share a demographic category. Most in cities develop their identity around the districts where they live, work, or play.
      * In Wake Forest, districts tend to line up with what high school someone goes to around here.
      * Shapes self-perception and possibly opportunities as well as perception of "outsiders."
      * Each segment has its own subculture, language, and rules to live by which may provide barriers or bridges for gospel communication.
   * "Edges" - the boundaries where districts meet often with some physical barrier such as a railroad track, tunnel, bridge, or body of water.
      * People often honor these edges and don't venture across them.
      * Missionaries usually must cross these boundaries to work, but must be cognizant of how they shape their audiences worldview.
   * "Landmarks" - stand out and are used to give directions. Sometimes paths can be this.
   * "High places" - are sacred places or structures that shape the culture as people gather to receive and interpret information. These are places of power and influence that keep the worldview of a group in tact.
      * Sometimes religious. In a postmodern society, many of these have secular foundations. (Chapel Hill --> UNC)
  * Sociology: Mapping the Story
     * Demographics can run deeper than what's seen on the surface.
     * Needs may not be obvious.
     * Narrative is how a group or individual's story has been shaped by where they live or work.
  * Spiritual Mapping:
     * Where are the apparent idols?
     * Where are the potential points of conflict?
     * How has God already been working in the area?
     * How does the narrative reflect their need for the Gospel?
     * Where are persons of peace?
     * Map connections and conversations and potential influence.

## Overlapping Worldviews

### Modern and Postmodern

* Modern
   * Is it true? Give me a reasoned argument.
   * Want a monologue.
   * Asks how do you know there is a God? How do you know the Bible is true?
   * Says I don't believe you; you are wrong.
   * Won't grant you the validity of your story.
   * Will believe in God first, and then relate to his people. They believe first, and then find belonging. They join the God of the people, and then join the people of God.
* Postmodern
   * Is it real? Give me a testimony of story to show how it works.
   * Wants dialogue and **questions.**
   * Asks what about other religions?
   * Says that's true for you but not for me; I'm happy that you've found something to believe in.
   * Happily listens to your story; but it won't become their story (your story has no claim on them).
   * Will relate to God's people, and then believe in God. They find belonging first, and then believe. They join the people of God, then join the God of the people.

### Defeater Beliefs

* A defeater belief is that if "A" is true, then "B" can't possibly be true.
   * If evolution is true, then the Bible can't be true.
   * If truth is relative, then there can't be one way to live.
* Apologetics can help deconstruct the defeater belief. But, only after the story.
* Connect the story of Jesus to the cultural narrative.
   * See "He Gets Us" and "I am Second."
1. Make the Gospel attractive and compelling by connecting it to the cultural narrative. How is Jesus the answer to big cultural questions and aspirations?
   * Personal Freedom
   * Identity
   * Unity in Diversity
2. Dismantle defeater beliefs by explaining why Christianity can be true. Make them wish Christianity were true. Then show them that it is.
3. Circle back and give a more thorough explanation of the gospel and how it answers worldview questions.

### *Questioning Evangelism* by Randy Newman

* Differentiation
   * Individuals are just that. One method of evangelism is not suitable for all people.
   * Jesus used a variety of methods most often based upon an initial assessment for understanding.
   * That initial assessment will most often come only by your asking a question.
* Three Necessary Skills
   * Declaration: the ability to clearly and concisely articulate the message of salvation.
      * Scripture-based gospel explanation
      * Personal Story
   * Defending: anticipating common questions based upon experiences and planning how to respond to those questions in your next encounter (1 Peter 3:15)
      * CARM.org
   * Dialoguing: give and take in a conversational approach to sharing.
      * Allows you to hear real questions and reeducate based upon misconceptions.
      * Allows you to assess the level of understanding and take appropriate next level steps.
* Newman Quotes
   * "Not all unbelief is intellectual at its core; therefore, reason alone will fail to sway such unbelief." Newman, page 67.
* Discernment
   * Most of the listener's initial questions will be smokescreens in an attempt to shut you up.
   * The best way to respond to a question is by asking a question.
   * Mark 10:17-18: Jesus discerned that the question was not coming with the right motive and thus answered with a question to get at that motive.
* Why Questions?
   * Answering a question with a question often has significant advantages over giving direct answers:
      * Brings questioner's assumptions to the surface.
      * Takes the pressure off of you having all the answers.
      * Paves the way to receptivity.

---

[Back to EVA5100](/notes/eva5100)