---
title: Notes 10/30/23
author: Lane Willis
type: page
nav_order: 2
created: 2023-10-30
parent: MIS6590
grand_parent: Classes

---

## Notes 10/30/23
{: .no_toc }

---

<details closed markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Table of contents
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }
1. TOC
{:toc}
</details>

---

### Building a Balanced Strategy

#### Tom Steffen's *Passing the Baton*
1. Phase-out: Foundation to interdependence. Key word: Parting
   * Why start here? You must look to phasing out in order to have good strategy for the end.
   * This helps us seek indigeneity from the outset.
   * If you don't have a clear vision of the end goal, your plans won't be focused.
2. Pre-entry: Foundation to personal/team develoment. Key word; Preparing
   * Building a team around the vision.
   * Preparation and research done before going.
   * Build a team manual with resources to create a unified understanding.
3. Pre-evangelism: foundation to relationships. Key word: Perceiving.
   * Language and culture acquisition.
   * Creating curiosity and establishing biblical authority.
4. Evangelism: foundation to church. Key word; Presenting.
   * Building upon relationships through contextualized communication.
   * Presenting the Gospel in a way that makes others wish it were true.
5. Post-evangelism: Foundation to maturity. Key word: Perfecting.
   * Building the church through disciple-making/leadership development.

#### Four Fields
1. Entry
   * Who to reach?
   * How to engage?
2. Gospel
3. Discipleship
4. Church
5. Leaders

#### City Church Network's Contextual Approach
* Vision must be grounded in:
   * Biblical vision of the Father's heart.
   * Understanding harvest field segments.
   * Multiplication of disciples and churches.
   * Abiding in Christ
   * Kingdom prayer
* Entry: Saved and Lost
* Evangelism: Mouth and Ear
* Disciple-making: 3/3rds.
* Church planting: Identity
* Leadership Development: Equip and Empower

***SEE Bookmark resource given.

---

[Back to MIS6590](/classes/semester-6/mis6590/mis6590.html)