---
title: Notes 11/13/23
author: Lane Willis
type: page
nav_order: 3
created: 2023-11-13
parent: MIS6590
grand_parent: Classes

---

## Notes 11/13/23
{: .no_toc }

---

<details closed markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Table of contents
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }
1. TOC
{:toc}
</details>

---

### Justin White Interview
* Studied how Jesus trained his disciples.
* Discussed residency for missionary training.
* Showed important values on training how Jesus was training.
* Did church planting in RDU through NPL.
* Barriers:
   * Harvest
      * 72% of people in Raleigh area aren't willing to attend a regular church barrier.
      * People isolated, transient, and busy.
   * Church
      * We don't really train people to embrace their role as a priest.
* Leadership development starts with two things:
   1. Abiding with Christ
   2. Evangelism (entry and Gospel)
* Sleep where they sleep and walk where they walk. Do life with them.
* Saved us from sin and for a purpose.
* Doing the missionary task is a requirement for missionary service.

## Training for Church Planting and Lessons from Paul

### Keys to Training National Church Planters/Cross-Cultural Equipping Principles
* **Biblically Based:** Does your equipping flow from Scripture reinforcing that God has supplied all their needs therein?
* **Trans-culturally relevant:** Are your concepts clouded with cultural baggage? Cross cultural-communication requires contextualization.
   * Go over the translator in advance to be appropriate for the context.
* **Menu-based equipping:** Are you answering questions they are asking? Let your agenda be to help at their point of need.
* **Reproducibility:** Can they take what you give them and spread it without additional help? Is it actually reproducing?
   * Build in training sessions.
* **Model Application:** Have you planned for immediate application through lab exercises?
* **Obedience-based Education:** Do they understand that there's no need for acquiring more training until they have implemented what they already have?

* Lecture + Lab = Productivity
* Leadership Development + Targeted Evangelism/Discipleship/CP = Greater Harvest Potential

### Company's MAWL Approach
* M: Model - ride the bicycle with them on it.
* A: Assist - hold the bicycle while they are learning to ride.
   * They lead in CP activity while you participate.
* W: Watch - provide training wheels and watch them ride.
   * They initiate and lead CP activities while you observe. Give feedback in private to help development.
* L: Launch - send them out to do it on their own.
* L: Love - discuss their progress
* L: Leave - leave to partner.

### Evaluating a CP Strategy
* Is it obedience-based?
* Does it grant responsibilities to everyone?
* Does it plan for multiplication?
* Is it facilitated by insiders?
* Does it depend on self-discovery?
* Does it lead to church formation?
* Is it reproducing?

### Napkin Image that summarizes CP training
* Heart/Vision for CP
* Prayer
* Make disciples
* Gather together
* Develop leaders
* Multiply

### First Century Model
* The Acts Progression
* Luke documents growth.
* 6 Verses in Acts that reference multiplication.

### Parable of the Harvest
* Break up the ground
* Sow the Seed
* Nurture the growth
* Bring in the harvest
* Gather new seed to sow
* Expand to new fields (Multiply churches)

### Paul's Example
* The existing church prayed
* They evangelized lost people.
* They discipled new believers.
* They gathered new believers into churches.
* They appointed and equipped leaders.
* Those churches then reproduced new churches.
* Showed image of 2 Timothy 2:2 chart of who Paul invested in.

## Paul's Journeys

### Questions to Ask
1. Where did Paul go?
2. What were the results?
3. How long did he stay?
4. Why did he leave?
5. What was Paul's entry strategy?
6. How did he share the Gospel?
7. How much time was spent in beginning discipleship?
8. Did he form churches?
9. Were leaders reproduced?

### Journey 1: Acts 13-14
* Characteristics of a sending church at Antioch
* Three fields begin: Cyprus, Phrygia, and Galatia
* Total duration is thought to be less than 18 months. Means little time spent any one place, elders appointed rapidly.
* Persecution followed everywhere.
* Gospel presentation summary (13:16-41)
* Refusal of Paul/Barnabas to allow syncretism. (14:8-20)

### Journey 2: Acts 15:39-18:22
* First discipleship journey - Galatia and Phrygia (15:41-16:6)
* List new leaders: Silas, Timothy, Luke, Lydia, Priscilla/Aquilla, etc.
* Macedonian call leads to Philippi - no synagogue, only women and jailers.
* Short stay in Thessalonica (17:2)
* Corinth - longest stay yet, but many problems (18:11)
* Two new fields, Macedonia/Achaia.

### Journey 3: Acts 18:23-20:38
* Asia previously closed now open for Ephesus. Timing is everything.
* Summary of his messaage - 20:20-21
* Commissioning of leaders - chapter 20
* 20:4 - list of upcoming leaders.

### Twelve Lessons from Paul's Journey - The "DNA" of Multiplying Churches
1. Rapid - Paul covers an area with a population of over 25 million within a 15 year window.
2. Six streams of church planting - multiple streams developing simultaneously.
   * Cyprus, Phrygia, Galatia, Macedonia, Achaia, Asia
3. Clear priorities - Find, win man of peace, baptize, disciple new believers in home setting, release authority, revisit (evaluate, appoint elders)
4. Authority Passed Quickly - One of the longest stays was Corinth, only 18 months. Paul says he was not the one who baptized.. then who did?
5. New works were treated as churches from the very beginning. Paul's letters are never addressed to cell groups or fellowships. Respect is given as "co-laboreres", "brothers chosen by God".
6. Ownership of the Great Commission among new believers. Example of the Thessalonian church. (Acts 17:1-9)
7. Persecution - the cost of following ensured true believers.
8. Immediate baptism - no example of delay in Paul's writings.
9. Began in regional centers - Paphos, Pisidian Antioch, Iconium, Lystra, Derbe, Phillipi, Thessalonica, Berea, Athens, Corinth, Ephesus.
   * Places of influence with trade routes.
10. Key trainers and helpers in every region - see leadership development chart in this section.
11. Returned when possible - every field visited was revisited at least once before Paul's imprisonment. Letters also.
12. Holy Spirit driven - Paul was never in charge of direction. Rather God determined the doors and timing of his entry and departure. Many times persecution allowed by God moved Paul to new fields. It was God who said leave the new believers to stand!

---

[Back to MIS6590](/notes/mis6590)