---
title: Notes 11/27/23
author: Lane Willis
type: page
nav_order: 5
created: 2023-11-27
parent: MIS6590
grand_parent: Classes

---

## Notes 11/27/23
{: .no_toc }

---

<details closed markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Table of contents
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }
1. TOC
{:toc}
</details>

---

### Interview with Nathan R.
* Discussed house church planting in difficult contexts.
* Told part of his testimony.
* Talked about reproduction and leadership skills.
* Emphasized prayer and calling.
* Emphasized how church planting in a difficult context is spiritual warfare.

### Seven Phases of CP by Scoggins and Brown

#### Phase 1: Launching the Team
* Definition: Preparing the team. Initial CP plans and strategies.
* When begun the aspiring team coordinator has officially been "knighted" by the general director to become a designated team coordinator.
* Research best information available on language, history, and culture of country and target group.
* Prepare a vision statement.
* Develop memorandum of understanding.
* Get church approval, support for each team member.
* Plan a strategy paper.
* Each team member secures adequate prayer and financial support.
* Recruit a team.
* Get the team to own the vision and strategy for CP.
* Complete team coordinator checklist.

#### Phase 2: Preparing to Sow
* Definition: Learning the language, adjusting to the culture, becoming "belongers" in society.
* When begun: Most of the team is on-site (and, usually, engaged in aggressive language learning.)
* Team members "land," secure suitable housing, arrange for their initial entry strategy.
* Resolve conflicts arising in the home.
* Address team conflicts.
* Develop a team life which spiritually sustains members.
* Goal-setting and planning for the team. Language and culture adjustment.
* Team members work hard at learning the target language.
* Learn how to survive in area chosen, get comfortable, and enjoy life in the country.
* Enable a family to do the same.
* Start residency procedure on basis of strategy.

#### Phase 3: Sowing
* Definition: The noble work of EV.
* When Begun: Most members of the team are spending most of their ministry time on evangelism, as opposed to language learning.
* Memorize parts of the Bible (e.g. parables or miracles, etc) in the target language.
* Learn to share biblical truths in the langauge.
* Develop a sympathy for the gospel in friends.
* Develop a strategy for reaching receptive people and their closest relationships (family or friends) as a group.
* Begin evangelistic Bible studies.
* Encourage contacts to bring some committed relations.
* Prayerfully evaluate your friends for a prospective person of peace: can he bring others with him?
* Prayerfully identify one or more potential men or women of peace among your relationships.
* Lead someone to commit to follow Jesus.

#### Phase 4: Discipling Begins.
* Definition: Discipling on or more believers from the target group. Both parties should recognize this as a process toward the maturing of believers in character and service for Christ.
* When begun: Begin regular discipleship with believer, regardless of how they came to Jesus.
* Challenge one or more believers to be discipled by you or your team members, so they might grow "unto the full measure of Christ."
* Model Christ's lifestyle before this man and his network.
* Have believer include some of his family or friends in the discipling.
* Disciple believers to:
   * Fully understand their identity as a child of God by faith, not works.
   * Understand the purpose of baptism as an outward sign of the death of self and rebirth in Christ.
   * Relate Bible stories that will impact life.
   * Develop a regular habit of turning to Scripture to deal with specific problems as they arise.

#### Phase 5: Beginning the Church
* Definition: The ministry of gathering believers together. Growing the fellowship into a church or having such work with more than one group. During this phase the church planter exerts significant influence in the community.
* When Begun: Three or more believers begin meeting regularly together for fellowship in Christ, teaching, prayer, etc.
* Family and friends begin to explore the good news together.
* Three or more believers agree to follow Christ in a committed community.
* Church planter shares God's plan for forming kingdom communities among family and friends.
* Believers embrace God's plan for forming kingdom communities and, together with the church planter, decide on a culturally meaningful pattern for regular gatherings.
* Believers learn to recognize and maximize spiritual gifts in the emerging community of believers.
* The older believers understand the "one another" verses of the Bible and how they define Christian community.

#### Phase 6: Training Leaders
* Definition: Last steps so that the believer fellowship is a complete church. Mainly leadership development and installation. In this phase, any remaining church planters will target leadership development.
* When begun: Leadership development is now the main work of the team. Team expects to conclude its role in the appointment of plurality of biblically qualified elders in six months or less. Any elder appointing after that is the responsibility of the existing elders.
* Leaders emerge.
* Older believers have baptized new believers.
* Older believers are discipling new believers.
* Believers take responsibility for biblical instruction.
* Initial leaders emerging and functioning as shepherds.
* Growth in godliness in their homes sets pace for others.
* Lord's Supper taking place.
* Gifts encouraged and developed for edification.
* Forbearing and forgiving one another.
* Character developed in context of marriage.
* CP absent from community meetings, leadership meetings.
* Elders formally ordained.

#### Phase 7: Reproducing and Exiting
* You want to see multiplication taking place!
* Peacemaking skills among leaders practiced.
* CP redefines relationship to leaders as coach. No longer attends leadership meetings unless invited.
* New churches started without a church planter.
* Vision developed to plant churches beyond local area.
* Vision given by leaders to congregation.
* Means of sending teams of nationals devised.
* CP sent out either with frontiers team or other teams.
* New clusters of communities started.
* National teams of CP sent out.


---

[Back to MIS6590](/notes/mis6590)