---
title: Notes 11/6/23
author: Lane Willis
type: page
nav_order: 2
created: 2023-11-06
parent: MIS6590
grand_parent: Classes

---

## Notes 11/6/23
{: .no_toc }

---

<details closed markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Table of contents
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }
1. TOC
{:toc}
</details>

---

### The Pauline Cycle for Church Planting

"If you want to plant something that lasts for a season, plant a flower. If you want to plant something that lasts a lifetime, plant a tree. If you want to plant something that will last for eternity, plant a church." David Hesselgrave
* The church itself will last into eternity.

#### *Planting Churches Cross-Culturally* by Hesselgrave
* Missionaries Commissioned
   * Acts 13:1-4
   * Church equips, recognizes, affirms, and sends.
   * If you go and fail to bring your church along with you, you fail at half your calling.
   * TAKE YOUR CHURCH ALONG
* Audience Contacted
   * Be selective with your "target group", but not exclusive.
* Gospel Communicated
   * "Gospel in the air" = grand narrative, most hearers need the context.
   * "Gospel on the ground" = propositional, if they already have the context.
   * Discussed communication theory.
* Hearers Converted
   * Acts 13:48, 16:14-15
   * Necessity of repentance...includes rejection of prior religious "forms" which abuse/obscure the gospel.
   * Goal is seeing brazen idolaters become awestruck worshippers.
* Believers Congregated
   * A part of the Church and a church (local)
   * Size/structure may vary. Strengths and weaknesses to all models.
* Faith Confirmed
   * "Bear fruit in keeping with repentance" (Matthew/Luke 3:8)
   * "Obedience that comes from faith" (Romans 1:5)
   * Discipleship/teaching obedience to Christ's commands.
* Leadership Consecrated
   * Master Plan of evangelism: selection, association, consecration, impartation, delegation, supervision, reproduction.
* Believers Commended
   * Paul moved on here...Phase out! They will want you to stay and keep "doing it for them"
* Relationships Continue
   * Visiting for encouragement, not to dictate and lead. Make this clear as they will most often default back to your leadership.
   * Potential role of on-going equipping of top-tier leaders. (TEE)
* Sending Churches Convene
   * Report back to your sending church. Have realistic expectations. If you've brought them along with you appropriately this will be celebratory.

How would you equip primarily oral learners for church planting?

---

[Back to MIS6590](/notes/mis6590)
